We've arrived at another one of
computer science's greatest hits,
namely Djikstra's shortest path algorithm.
So let me tell you about the problem,
it's a problem called single
source shortest paths.
Basically what we want to do is compute
something like driving directions.
So we're given as input a graph,
in this lecture I'm going to
work with directed graphs,
although the same algorithm would work for
undirected graphs with cosmetic changes.
As usual, we'll use m to
denote the number of edges and
n to denote the number of vertices.
The input also includes
two extra ingredients.
First of all, for each edge e we're
given as input a non-negative link
which I'll denote as l sub e.
In the context of a driving
directions application
l sub e could denote the mileage how
long this particular road is, or
it could also denote the expected
travel time along the edge.
The second ingredient is a vertex
from which we are looking for paths.
This is exactly the same as we
had in breadth first search.
In that first search we
have an originating vertex
which we'll call here the source.
Our responsibility then is to, given this
input, to compute for every other vertex,
v, in this network the length of
the shortest path from the source vertex,
s, to that destination vertex, v.
And so just to be clear,
what is the length of the path
that has say three edges in it?
Well it's just the sum of the link of the
first edge in the path plus the length of
the second edge in the path plus
the length of the third edge in the path.
So if you had a path like this with
three edges and length one, two and
three, then the length of
the path would just be six.
And then we define the shortest SV path
in the natural way, so amongst all of
the paths directed from S to V, each one
has its own respective path length and
then the minimum overall SV paths is
the shortest path distance in the graph G.
So I'm going to make two assumptions for
these lectures.
One is just really for convenience,
the other is really important.
The other assumption, without which,
Dijkstra's algorithm is not correct,
as we'll see.
So for convenience we'll assume
that there is a directed path from
S to every other vertex V in the graph,
otherwise the shortest path distance is
something we define to be plus infinity.
And the reason this is
not a big assumption is,
if you think about it, you could detect
which vertices are not reachable from
S just in a preprocessing step using,
say, breadth-first or depth-first search.
And then you could delete
the irrelevant part of the graph, and
run Dijkstra's algorithm as we'll
describe it on what remains.
Alternatively, Dijkstra's algorithm
will quite naturally figure out
what vertices there are paths to from
S and which ones there are not, so
this won't really come up.
So to keep it simple,
just think about we have an input graph
where you can get from S to V,
for every different vertex V.
And the challenge then is amongst
all the ways to get from S to V,
what is the shortest way to do it?
So the second assumption already
appears in the problem statement, but
I want to reiterate it just so
it's really clear.
When we analyze Jackson's algorithm,
we always focus on
graphs where every length is non-negative,
no negative edge lengths are allowed.
And we'll see why a little
bit later in the video.
Now in the context of a driving
directions application
it's natural to ask the question why would
you ever care about negative edge lengths.
Until we invent a time machine
that doesn't seem like
negative edge lengths are going to be
relevant when you are computing literal
paths through literal networks.
But again remember that paths can be
thought of as more abstractly as a just
sequence of decisions.
And some of the most powerful
applications of shortest paths
are coming up with optimal
weight such sequences.
So, for example, maybe you're engaging
in financial transactions and
you have the option of both buying and
selling assets at different times.
If you sell then you get
some kind of profit and
that would correspond to
a negative edge length.
So there are quite interesting
applications in which negative edge
lengths are relevant.
If you are dealing with
such an application,
Dijkstra's algorithm is
not the algorithm to use.
There's a different shortest path
algorithm, a couple other ones.
But the most well-known one
is called Bellman-Ford.
That's something based
on dynamic programming,
which we may well cover in a SQL course.
Okay, so for Dijkstra's algorithm,
we always focus on graphs.
That'll have only
non-negative edge lengths.
So, with the next quiz, I just want to
make sure that you understand the single
source shortest path problem.
Let me draw for you here a simple
four node network, and ask you for,
what are the four shortest path lengths.
So from the source vertex s, to each
of the four vertices in the network.
All right, so the answer to this
quiz is the final option, 0,1,3,6.
To see why that's true, well,
all of the options had 0 as the
shortest-path distance from s to itself.
So that just seemed kind of obvious.
So the empty path will get you from
s to itself and have 0 length.
No suppose you wanted to get from S to V,
well there's actually only one way to do
that, you have to go
along this one hop path.
So the only path has length of one, so the
shortest path distance from S to V is one.
Now W's more interesting,
there's a direct one hop path, SW,
that has a length of four, but
that is not the shortest path from S to
W Inf act to two-hop path that goes
through v as an intermediary has
total path length three which is less than
the length of the direct arc from s to w.
So therefore the shortest distance
from s to w is going to be 3.
And finally for the vertex t there's
three different paths going from s to t.
There's the two-hop path
that goes through v.
There's the two hop path which goes
through w, both of those have path length
7, and then there's the three hop
path which goes through both v and w.
And that actually has a path length of
one plus two plus three equals six.
So despite having a largest number of
edges, the zigzag path is, in fact,
the shortest path from s to t and
it has length 6.
All right, so before I tell you
how Dijstrka's algorthin works,
I feel like I should justify
the existence of this video a little bit.
All right?
Because this is not the first
time we've seen shortest paths.
You might be thinking rightfully so.
We already know how to
compute shortest paths.
That was one of the applications
of breadth first search.
So the answer to this
question is both yes and no.
Breadth first search does
indeed compute shortest paths.
We had an entire video about that.
But it works only in the special
case where the length
of every edge of the graph is one.
At the moment we're trying to
solve a more general problem.
We're trying to solve shortest paths,
when edges can have arbitrary
non-negative edge lengths.
So for example, in the graph that
we've explored in the previous quiz,
if we ran breadth first search,
starting from the vertex s,
it would say that the shortest
path distance from s to t is 2 and
that's because there's a path
with two hops going from s to t.
Put differently,
t is in the second layer emanating from s.
But as we saw in the quiz,
there's not in fact
a shortest two hop path from s to t
if you care about the edge lengths.
Rather the minimum length path, the
shortest path, with respect to the edge
weights, is this three hop path
which gives us a total length of 6.
So breadth first search is not
going to give us what we want
when the edge lengths
are not all the same.
And if you think about an application like
driving directions, then needless to say,
it's not the case that every
edge in the network is the same.
Some roads are much longer than others,
some roads will have much larger
travel times than others, so
we really do need to solve this
more general shortest path problem.
Similarly, if you're thinking more
abstractly about a sequence of decisions
like financial transactions,
in general different transactions
will have different values.
So you really want to solve
general shortest paths,
you're not in the special case
that breadth-first search solves.
Now, if you're feeling
particularly sharp today,
you might have the following
objection to what I've just said.
You might say, eh, big deal.
General edge weights, unit edge weights,
it's basically the same.
Say you have an edge
that has length three.
How is that fundamentally different
than having a path with three edges,
each of which has length one?
So why not just replace all the edges with
a path of edges of the appropriate length?
Now we have a network in which
every edge has unit length and
now we can just run breadth-first search.
So put succinctly, isn't it the case that
computing shortest paths with general
edge weights reduces to computing
shortest paths with unit edge weights?
Well, the first comment I want to make
is I think this would be an excellent
objection to raise.
And indeed, as programmers,
as computer scientists,
this is the way you should be thinking.
If you see a problem that seems
superficially harder than another one,
you always want to ask, well, maybe
just with a clever trick I can reduce it
to a problem I already know how to solve.
That's a great attitude in general for
problem solving.
And indeed, if all of the edge lengths
were just small numbers, like 1, 2, and
3 and so on, this trick would work fine.
The issue is when you have a network
where the different edges can have very
different lengths.
And that's certainly the case
in many applications.
Definitely road networks would be
one where you have both sort of long
highways and
you have neighborhood streets.
And potentially in financial transaction
based networks you would also have a wide
variance between the value
of different transactions.
And the problem then is some of these
edge lengths might be really big.
They might be 100, they might be 1,000.
It's very hard to put operating bounds on
how large these edge weights could be.
So if you start wantonly replacing single
edges with these really long paths
of like 1,000, you've blown up
the size of your graph way too much.
So you do have a faithful
representation of your old network, but
it's too wasteful.
So even though breadth-first
search runs in linear time,
it's now on this much larger graph.
And we'd much prefer something
which is linear time or
almost linear time that works
directly on the original graph.
And that is exactly what
Dijkstra's shortest-path algorithm
is going to accomplish.
Let's now move on to the pseudocode for
Dijkstra's shortest path algorithm.
So this is another one of those algorithms
where no matter how many times I explain
it, it's always just super fun to teach.
And the main reason is because it exposes
the beauty that pops up in good algorithm
design.
So the pseudocode, as you'll see in
a second, is itself very elegant.
We're just going to have one loop, and in
each iteration of the loop we will compute
the shortest path distance
to one additional vertex.
And by the end of the loop we'll compute
shortest path distances to everybody.
The proof of correctness, which we'll do
in the next video, is a little bit subtle,
but also quite natural, quite pretty.
And then finally, Dijkstra's algorithm
will give us our first opportunity to see
the interplay between good algorithm
design and good data structure design.
So with a suitable application
of the heap data structure,
we'll be able to implement Dijkstra's
algorithm so it runs blazingly fast,
almost linear time, namely m times log n.
But I'm getting little ahead of myself.
Let me actually show you this pseudocode.
At a high level, you really should think
of Dijkstra's algorithm as being a close
cousin of breadth-first search.
And indeed, if all of the edge
lengths are equal to one,
Dijkstra's algorithm becomes
breadth-first search.
So this is sort of a slick
generalization of breadth-first search
when edges can have different lengths.
So like our generic graph search
procedures, we're going to start at
the source vertex s, and in each iteration
we're going to conquer one new vertex.
And we'll do that once each iteration
after m minus1 iteration, we'll be done.
And in each iteration will correctly
compute the shortest path distance
to one new possible destination vertex v.
So let me just start by
initializing some notation.
So capital X is going to denote
the vertices that we've dealt with so far.
And by dealt with, I mean we've correctly
computed shortest path distance
from the source vertex
to every vertex in X.
We're going to augment X by one new vertex
in each iteration of the main loop.
Remember that we're responsible for
outputting n numbers, one for each vertex.
We're not just computing one thing,
we're computing the shortest path distance
from the source vertex s
to every other vertex.
So I'm going to frame the output
in terms of this array capital A.
So for each vertex, we're going to
have an entry in the array A,
and the goal is at
the end of the algorithm,
A will be populated with the correct
shortest path distances.
Now to help you understand
Dijkstra's algorithm,
I'm going to do some additional
bookkeeping which you would not do
in a real implementation
of Dijkstra's algorithm.
Specifically, in addition to
this array capital A in which we
compute shortest path distances from the
source vertex to every other destination,
there's going to be an array
capital B in which we'll keep track
of the actual shortest path itself from
the source vertex s to each destination v.
So the arrays A and
B will be indexed in the same way.
There'll be one entry for
each possible destination vertex v.
Capital A will store just a number for
each destination, shortest path distance.
The array B in each position
will store an actual path,
so the shortest path from s to V.
But again, you would not include
this in an actual implementation.
I just find in my experience it's easier
for students to understand this algorithm
if we think of the paths
being carried along as well.
So now that I've told you
the semantics of these two arrays,
I hope it's no surprise how we initialize
them for the source vertex itself, s.
The shortest path distance
from s to itself is 0.
The empty path gets you
from s to s with length 0.
There's no negative edges by assumption,
so
there's no way you can get from s back
to s with a non-positive length, so
this is definitely the shortest
path distance for s.
By the same reasoning,
the shortest path from s to s is just the
empty path, the path with no edges in it.
So now let's proceed to
the main while loop.
So the plan is we want to grow this set
capital X like a mold until it covers
the entire graph.
So in each iteration, it's going to
grow and cover up one new vertex and
that vertex will then be processed.
And at the time of processing,
we're responsible for
computing the shortest path
distance from s to this vertex and
also figuring out what the actual
shortest path from s to this vertex is.
So in each iteration, we need to grow X by
one node to ensure that we make progress.
So the obvious question is,
which node should we pick?
Which one do we add to X next?
So there's going to be two ideas here.
The first one we've already seen in terms
of all of these generic graph search
procedures, which is we're
going to look at the edges and
the vertices which are on the frontier.
So we're going to look at the vertices
that are just one hop away
from vertices we've already put into X.
So that motivates that a given
iteration of the while loop
to look at the stuff we've
already process, that's X, and
the stuff we haven't already processed,
that's v minus X.
s, of course, starts in X and
we never take anything out of X, so
s is still there.
In some generic iteration
of the while loop,
we might have some other
vertices that are in X.
And in a generic iteration
of this while loop,
there might be multiple
vertices which are not in X.
And now, as we've seen in our graph
search procedures, there are general or
edges crossing this cut.
So there are edges which have one endpoint
in each side, one endpoint in X and
one endpoint outside of X.
This is a directed graph so
they can cross in two directions.
They can cross from left to right or
they can cross from right to left.
So you might have some
edges internal to X.
Those are things we don't
care about at this point.
You might have edges which
are internal to v- X.
We also don't care about those,
at least not quite yet.
And then you got edges which
can cross from X to v-X,
as well as edges that can cross in the
reverse direction, from v -X back to X.
And the ones we're going to be interested
in, just like when we did graph search and
directed graphs,
are the edges crossing from left to right,
the edges whose tail is amongst
the vertices we've already seen and
whose head is some not yet
explored vertex.
So the first idea is that in each
iteration of the while loop we scan, or
we examine, all of the edges with
tail in X and head outside of X.
One of those is going to lead us
to the vertex that we pick next.
So that's the first idea, but
now we need a second idea,
because this is again
quite underdetermined.
There could be multiple such
vertices which meet this criterion.
So for example, in the cartoon in
the bottom left part of this slide,
you'll notice that
there's one vertex here.
Which is the head of an arc that
crosses from left to right.
And there's yet
another vertex down here in v minus x,
which again is the head of an arc
which crosses from left to right.
There are two options of which of
those two to suck into our set x and
we might want some guidance
about which one to pick next.
The key idea in Dijkstra is
to give each vertex a score
corresponding to how close that vertex
seems to the source vertex s, and
then to pick among all candidate vertices,
the one that has the minimum score.
Let me be more precise.
Among all crossing edges, with tail on
the left side and head on the right side,
we pick the edge that minimizes
the following criterion.
The shortest path distance that we've
previously computed from s to the vertex
v, plus the length of the edge
that connects v to w.
This is quite an important expression, so
I will call this Dijkstra's
greedy criterion.
This is a very good idea to
use this method to choose
which vertex to add to the set x,
as we'll see.
I need to give a name to this edge
which minimizes this quantity over all
crossing edges.
Let's call it v star w star.
For example,
in the cartoon in the bottom left,
maybe of the two edges crossing from
left to right, maybe the top one
is the one that has a smaller value
of Dijkstra's greedy criterion.
In that case,
this would be the vertex v star and
the other end of the edge
would be the vertex w star.
This edge, v star,
w star is going to do wonders for us.
It will both guide us to the vertex
that we should add the x next,
that's going to be w star.
It's going to tell us how we should
compute the shortest path distance to w
star, as well as what the actual
shortest path from s to w star is.
Specifically, in this iteration of the
wild loop, after we've chosen this edge v
star w star, we add w star to x.
Remember, by definition,
w star was previously not in capitol X.
We're making progress by adding it to x,
that's one more vertex in x.
Now x is supposed to represent all of
the nodes that we've already processed.
So an environ of this algorithm is that
we've computed shortest path distances for
everybody in x as well as
the actual shortest paths.
Now that we're putting w star in x, we're
responsible for all this information,
the shortest path information.
What we're going to do is we're
going to set the r estimate
of w star's shortest path
distance from s to be equal to
the value of this Dijkstra's
greedy criterion for this edge.
That is, whatever our previously computed
shortest path distance from s to v star
was plus the length of the direct
edge from v star to w star.
Now a key point is to realize
that this code does make sense.
By which I mean,
if you think about this quantity A(v),
this is been previously computed.
And that's because environ of this
algorithm is we've always computed
shortest path distances to
everything that is in capital X.
And of course, the same thing holds when
we need to assign w star shortest path
distance because v star
was a member of capital X,
we had already computed its
shortest path distance.
So we can just look up the v star
entry position in the array a.
Over in our picture on our left,
we would just say,
what did we compute the shortest
path distance to v star previously?
Maybe it's something like 17.
And then we'd say, what is the length of
this direct edge from v star to w star?
Maybe that's 6.
Then we would just add 17 and 6 and
we would put 23 as our estimate of the
shortest path distance from s to w star.
We do something analogous with
the shortest path itself in the array b.
That is, again, we're responsible,
since we just added w star to capital X,
we're responsible for suggesting a path
from s to w star in the b array.
What we're going to do is we're just going
to inherit the previously computed path
to v star and we're just going to
tack on the end one extra hop,
namely the direct edge
from v star to w star.
That will give us a path from s
all the way to w star via v star
as an intermediate pit stop and that is
the entirety of Dijkstra's Algorithm.
I've explained all of the ingredients
about how it works at a conceptual level.
The two things I argue is,
why is it correct?
Why does it actually compute shortest
paths directly to all of the different
vertices, and then secondly,
how fast can we implement it?
The next two videos are going to
answer both of those questions but
before we do that, let's go through
an example to get a better feel for
how this algorithm actually works.
I also want to go through a non example so
that you can appreciate how it breaks
down when there are negative edges, and
that'll make it clear why do we need
a proof of correctness because it's not
correct without any assumptions
about the edge lengths.